---
layout: post
title: "We don't read about dinosaurs"
author: "P.D. Schloss"
date: "November 25, 2014"
comments: false
---

To be perfectly frank, I think bioinformatics and the problems most of us are
interested in are pretty abstract. Worse, they're pretty boring. Try going to a
party and talk about the latest greatest way of assembling a genome. Try going
to your kids school and tell them about why you think we should or shouldn't use
a 3% cutoff to define a bacterial OTU. You might bring some caffeine pills with
you. So what makes bioinformatics, computer science, and math interesting? Cool
examples.

Let me back up. I'm a member of the University of Michigan's Senate Assembly.
Normally this means that once a month I get to hear some interesting policy
discussions while eating cheese and crackers. At the November session we were
discussing the relationship between the Athletic Department and the rest of
campus and the safeguards that are in place to make sure that [we don't turn into
UNC](https://espn.go.com/college-sports/story/_/id/11745036/north-carolina-investigation-says-advisers-pushed-sham-classes). One of the Senate Assembly members indicated that he was teaching
a [course on the culture of basketball](https://www.lsa.umich.edu/cg/cg_detail.aspx?content=2020RCHUMS334004&termArray=sp_15_2030,w_15_2020,f_14_2010) and had a number of athletes in his class. Predictably, a professor from a
science department asked how this was tolerated. Thankfully, someone told the
scientist he was out of line, but not before the basketball prof could make an
important point. The point of the course is to use an accessible topic
(basketball) to address a set of topics that can be abstract to many people:
race, ethnicity, gender, storytelling, etc. We quickly moved on and agreed that
we don't want to review each course's syllabus. The bigger point is that there
are many ways at a university to teach these themes and there should be an
opportunity to learn about culture through sports, about history through Rock
and Roll, and statistics from baseball.

This argument for the course makes perfect sense to me. I would love to learn
about race, ethnicity, gender, etc. through the lense of sports. I have no
skills, but I generally like sports and find they're a pretty fun topic to
discuss because we get that they're games and generate a lot of interesting
First World Problems. On my bookshelf right now I have a copy of [Baseball
Hacks](https://www.amazon.com/Baseball-Hacks-Analyzing-Winning-Statistics/dp/0596009429), which I poured over to learn more about
probability, R, markov models, SQL, and general data analysis. I get baseball. I
can relate to the situation where a [team is up 3-0 with one out in the 8th
inning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Bartman_incident) and five outs away
from that team making the World Series. What's the probability that the team
goes on to win? Now assume that some knucklehead interferes with a play and the
batter goes on to walk. What is the probability that player scores? What is the
probability that the team goes on to score 8 runs? It can be modeled as a
Markovian process just like predicting a protein fold. I get baseball. I get
card games. I get the stock market. The products of the analysis are something
tangible that I can relate to. DNA and protein sequences? Yeah they're cool and
all, but sometimes they're just a little to abstract to use to help me or my
students to learn a concept.

A big challenge that I find in teaching is using the right examples to elicit
the reaction I had to Baseball Hacks in all of my students. I run into this
frequently when I try to think of examples of the "Portfolio effect" to explain
why diversity might lead to stability in communities. Always forgetting to write
down examples ahead of time that I can go to when I lecture, I draw the
following examples... mutual funds and positions on sport teams. You don't have
to think about stereotypes to realize that's a pretty limited list of examples.
Who do you think I capture with those examples? Now what if I were to say:
mutual funds, positions on sports teams, colors on a painter's pallet, food on a
buffet, or textures of surfaces in a room? Boom. I may not get everyone, but I
suspect I get a lot more of the room.

Similarly, a challenge of being a parent is motivating and helping your kids to
learn the basic building blocks that they'll need throughout life. I have a
bunch of kids. The motivations for #1 are to be doted on by others and seen as
"different". The motivation for #2 and 3 is money. Kid #1 loves to bake, sew,
and work on our farm doing all sorts of "dirty jobs". Kid #2 taught themselves
to knit and crochet. Kid #3 bought feeder calves that they raise and sell. You
get the picture? Each kid has a different motivation and interest that could be
used to teach them about math, writing, reading, history, ethics, logic, and so
forth. If I assume they have the same motivations and interests, I'll wind up
with a bunch of unmotivated kids that hate school. This leads us to the great
philosopher:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>Exactly why I don&#39;t like school. <a href="https://t.co/aeSzAKvT89">pic.twitter.com/aeSzAKvT89</a></p>&mdash; Calvin and Hobbes (@Calvinn_Hobbes) <a href="https://twitter.com/Calvinn_Hobbes/status/537025468026064896">November 24, 2014</a></blockquote> <script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

This struck a chord with me. Perhaps it's because kid #3 reminds me of Calvin.
Short, blond, doesn't really like school, and has an amazing imagination and
work ethic that is often mis-applied. If I asked #3 to figure out how many 800
lb bales of hay we need to get his two steers through the winter assuming they
eat 3% of their body weight each day, he could probably do it. Asking him to
solve: 2 x 500 x 0.03 x 180 / 800 will get you a tantrum. So why doesn't #3 love
school? Because he doesn't get to read enough about cows or dinosaurs:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>Too true. This is what&#39;s wrong with ed system &amp; the greatest challenge of parenting. Aligning interest w fundamentals <a href="https://t.co/JaNNm1uFKu">pic.twitter.com/JaNNm1uFKu</a></p>&mdash; Pat Schloss (@PatSchloss) <a href="https://twitter.com/PatSchloss/status/537030240372264960">November 24, 2014</a></blockquote> <script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

A final thought on the power of examples... Remember Kid #2, the one who taught
themselves to knit and crochet and made the $200 rug? Kid #2 is a boy. What
would happen if encouraged him to pursue more "boy" like activites? Many of us
think that the use of limited examples with young girls is discouraging them
from STEM disciplines. While Kid #1 will make you a killer cheesecake, you
better watch out on chicken butchering day. She loves digging through the offal
to find the various organs. Fast forward to science class, she's the only girl
that thinks it's fun to do dissections. Perhaps that's because she's the only
girl that is encouraged to think digging through intestines is a normal thing
for a girl to do. Will she be a baker or a surgeon? Probably neither. Instead,
think of the lessons she picks up along the way about the value of
baking birtday cakes to lift the spirits of her siblings or about science from
butchering chickens. As I tried to say in 140 characters, the biggest challenge
I face is figuring out my students' and kids' interests and knowing how to use
those to communicate the fundamental ideas that they need to move on to learn
the next concept.
