---
title: 'Mothur v.1.8.0'
redirect_from: '/wiki/Mothur_v.1.8.0'
---
We are happy to release [mothur v.1.8.0](mothur_v.1.8.0) on
the great American holiday of Groundhog Day! Well it\'s been a wild
couple of months since the last release of mothur - within hours of
sending out the announcement for the last version dotur 2.0 - Ruth - was
born. Blame the delay on a new baby, Christmas and New Years, and a
crazy January full of grant deadlines and conferences. But as you\'ve
come to expect, we have added a number of new features and bug fixes.
We\'ve been encouraged by the expanding traffic on the mothur forum and
appreciate everyone\'s willingness to answer other people\'s questions.

We are pretty excited about the new commands that we have added to
mothur and the long list of added features to previous commands. I am
grateful that people finally pushed us towards incorporating the
readline library, which allows you to use the arrow keys to move around
and recall previous commands in the mac and linux environments. Thank
you for all your suggestions and please keep them coming! It is amazing
how far mothur has come in the last year and much of it is due to the
input of users. Starting with this release we are also providing
precompiled binaries for the Mac OS - this will keep you from having to
have XCode to compile the source code. Let us know what you think of
this option.

Going forward we have many new ideas and are anxious to get them out to
you. Some things we\'re working on include incorporating non-parametric
estimation tools, wrapping clearcut so you can build trees within
mothur, and parallelizing the clustering pipeline. As always, feel free
to cite mothur liberally and if a paper you publish uses mothur, feel
free to tell us about it on the user forum.

## New commands

-   mothur uses the readline library to allow use of arrow keys and
    other shortcuts in [interactive mode](Interactive_mode).
-   added [mgcluster](mgcluster) command which incorporates
    the functionality of the mg-dotur program.
-   added [pcoa](pcoa) command to generate principal
    coordinate plots
-   added [pre.cluster](pre.cluster) command, which clusters
    sequences using a method similar to that described in the
    forthcoming paper by Huse et al.
-   added [set.dir](set.dir) command allowing you to set an
    input file directory and / or redirect the output files generated by
    mothur.
-   added [otu.hierarchy](otu.hierarchy) command which
    relates otus at different distance levels
-   added average neighbor and nearest neighbor methods to
    [hcluster](hcluster) command

## New features

-   mothur now allows for comments in fasta files in the following
    format, which will make analyzing output from the RDP easier
-   added flip and threshold parameters as well as a progress indicator
    to [align.seqs](align.seqs) command.
-   added list parameter to [list.seqs](list.seqs),
    [get.seqs](get.seqs) and
    [remove.seqs](remove.seqs) commands.
-   added probs parameter to the
    [classify.seqs](classify.seqs) command, so you can choose
    not to report the confidence scores with the bayesian method.
-   added iters and name parameters to
    [classify.seqs](classify.seqs) command.
-   added distance search method to
    [classify.seqs](classify.seqs)
-   added sorted parameter to [get.oturep](get.oturep)
    command, so the output can be sorted by sequence name, OTU number,
    OTU size, or group. The default is no sorting.
-   added large parameter to [get.oturep](get.oturep)
    command, so if your distance matrix is too large to fit in ram you
    can still run the command.
-   removed the groups parameter from
    [get.sharedseqs](get.sharedseqs) and in its place added
    the unique and shared parameters.
-   added file checking to read.dist to fix error that occured in the
    libshuff command if the files did not match.
-   you can now use a distance matrix as input for the
    [heatmap.sim](heatmap.sim) command.
-   added unclassified bins to [classify.seqs](classify.seqs)
    command output.
-   summary.shared(all=false) by default
-   added distance parameter to
    [unifrac.weighted](unifrac.weighted) and
    [unifrac.unweighted](unifrac.unweighted) commands that
    allows you to output a distance matrix from the command.
-   added random parameter to
    [unifrac.weighted](unifrac.weighted) and
    [unifrac.unweighted](unifrac.unweighted) commands that
    allows you to shut off the comparison to random trees.
-   [get.oturep](get.oturep) command now outputs a .rep.names
    file.
-   [get.oturep](get.oturep) command - when selecting the
    rep, if there are multiple sequence with the minimum maximum
    distance to other members in the bin the sequence with the smallest
    average distance is selected. This is a change that may produce
    different results from those calculated by previous mothur versions.
    previously the first sequence found with the minimum maximum
    distance was selected.
-   you can now read a shared file and then run the .single commands.
-   you can now input multiple fasta files to the
    [align.seqs](align.seqs) and
    [classify.seqs](classify.seqs) commands by separating
    filenames with dashes. i.e. fasta=abrecovery.fasta-amazon.fasta
-   added a timestamp to the mothur.logfiles (it\'s unix time)

## Bug fixes

-   added warning about average neighbor clustering near cutoff.
-   fixed a bug in how the morisitahorn index was being calculated
-   mothur\'s logfiles are now time stamped and not overwritten with
    each execution of mothur.
-   fixed bug in aligner that caused a bus error if your candidate
    sequence had more bases than your longest template sequence.
-   fixed bug in [merge.files](merge.files) command that gave
    a \"cannot open file\" error in the windows version.
-   added formatting to mothur to make phylip formatted distance files
    compatible with other software tools.
-   corrected error in help for [align.seqs](align.seqs) and
    [classify.seqs](classify.seqs) which gave incorrect
    defaults for the gapopen and gapextend defaults.
-   mothur now recognizes ./ and ../ in file names
