---
title: 'mothur v.1.11.0'
redirect_from: '/wiki/Mothur_v.1.11.0.html'
---
In honor of the upcoming fathur's day weekend we are happy to release
[mothur v.1.11.0](mothur_v.1.11.0). We are working on a
number of things behind the scenes that aren't quite ready for
primetime, so this is a relatively light release consisting primarily of
feature updates and bug fixes. We think you'll find the feature updates
go along way to expanding the flexibility of existing commands and
making them more computationally and memory efficient. Two new commands
have been added - [split.abund](split.abund) and
[classify.otu](classify.otu). The
[split.abund](split.abund) command will allow you to
partition your unique sequences based on how many sequences they
represent. This could be useful for people interested in using abundant
sequences as a reference template for different chimera checking
algorithms. The [classify.otu](classify.otu) command marries
the phylotype and OTU-based approaches. Give this command a taxonomy
file for your sequences and your list file and for each OTU it will
output the consensus taxonomy for the sequences in that OTU. There are
several options available for defining what is meant by consensus. Some
of you may have missed the last several releases because of difficulties
we were having with sending emails out of our server - this should be
fixed. Regardless, you should probably take a look at the last several
release notes to see how far we have come in the last few months.

Finally, we are trying to gauge people's interest in attending a
workshop on August 23-25 at a hotel near the Detroit airport (DTW). Feel
free to email us (mothur.bugs\@gmail.com) if you are interested or have
any questions.

## New commands

-   added [split.abund](split.abund) command - split sequence
    names into abundant and rare categories based on how many sequences
    they represent in a names file
-   added [classify.otu](classify.otu) command - get a
    consensus taxonomy for each OTU

## Feature updates

-   modified [chop.seqs](chop.seqs) command by changing
    parameter to fasta, keep and numbases. also made it work with
    aligned sequences.
-   added additional file checks to template and taxonomy files for
    [classify.seqs](classify.seqs) command, - be sure to
    remove your old .tree.train, tree.sum, .numNonZero, and .prob files
-   added taxonomy file to list of files
    [list.seqs](list.seqs), [get.seqs](get.seqs)
    and [remove.seqs](remove.seqs) commands can process.
-   [get.seqs](get.seqs) and
    [remove.seqs](remove.seqs) commands can now process more
    than one file at a time.
-   added dups parameter to [get.seqs](get.seqs)
-   added sort option to [get.otulist](get.otulist) command -
    [https://forum.mothur.org/viewtopic.php?f=3&t=368&sid=e81f0982fd4e09a24a2aff4ff1cde1c9](https://forum.mothur.org/viewtopic.php?f=3&t=368&sid=e81f0982fd4e09a24a2aff4ff1cde1c9)
-   allow for '\>' in sequence names
-   reduced memory used to generate
    [chimera.pintail](chimera.pintail) commands quantile
    values by 65%.

## Bug fixes

-   fixed bug [filter.seqs](filter.seqs) command in mpi
    enabled version that occasionally caused bus error occurred if trump
    parameter was used and vertical was set to false and soft was not
    set.
-   fixed bug in [trim.seqs](trim.seqs) introduced in 1.10.0
    with the addition of bdiffs, pdiffs and tdiffs.
-   fixed with [classify.seqs](classify.seqs) if the taxonomy
    and template files are in a different folders
-   mothur can now read trees generated by fasttree
-   fixed bug with [chimera.pintail](chimera.pintail) that
    caused a bad\_alloc if the quantiles needed to be generated.
