---
title: 'mothur v.1.16.0'
redirect_from: '/wiki/Mothur_v.1.16.0.html'
---
We are happy to announce the release of [mothur
v.1.16.0](/wiki/mothur_v.1.16.0), aka the "Brett who?" version in
celebration of the Green Bay Packers beating the Pittsburgh Steelers.
This release contains a number of new features related to multivariate
data visualization including implementations of tools to generate [
PCA](/wiki/pca) and [ nmds](/wiki/nmds), both of which
complement the earlier [ pcoa](/wiki/pcoa) command. Another new
command [corr.axes](/wiki/corr.axes) allows you to determine how
well the relative abundance of your OTUs/phylotypes or metadata
correlate with the axes generated by PCoA, NMDS, or PCA. These are the
data that are commonly plotted to generate biplot diagrams. In addition
we have added commands that allow you to [ remove rare
OTUs](/wiki/remove.rare) and [ merge
groups](/wiki/merge.groups) in a shared file. In addition to these
commands we have added a large number of features to the existing
commands most notable are the additions to the
[indicator](/wiki/indicator) and
[chimera.slayer](/wiki/chimera.slayer) commands and the inclusion
of an additional 18 beta-diversity estimators. Finally, we also added a
mothur-compatible version of the [ RDP training
set](/wiki/RDP_reference_files) to the wiki that you can use to
reproduce the output provided by the RDP website.

In the next several days you will be receiving an additional email or
two from us with information about several exciting developments. First,
we are going to change the way that this email system works. We are
still ironing out the kinks, but the new system will give you more
flexibility in joining and quitting the list. Second, we will be sending
out information about a survey we have pulled together to ask you guys
for some valuable information. Finally, two weeks ago we announced that
Pat will be hosting a workshop at a hotel near the Detroit International
Airport - that workshop is full, but we anticipate holding a second
workshop in April, if you are interested please email Pat (pdschloss
gmail com).

As always, we appreciate your enthusiastic use of mothur and ideas.
Within one year of publishing mothur, it received over 60 citations -
thank you! Feel free to keep the [six packs](https://leinie.com)
and Russian vodka coming\...


## New commands

-   [corr.axes](/wiki/corr.axes) - correlation of data to axes
-   [pca](/wiki/pca) - generate principle components plot data
-   [nmds](/wiki/nmds) - generate non-metric multidimensional
    scaling data
-   [remove.rare](/wiki/remove.rare) - remove OTUs that are below a
    threshold of abundance
-   [merge.groups](/wiki/merge.groups) - merge lines in shared file
    that are grouped by a design file.

## Feature updates

-   [indicator](/wiki/indicator) - added the design parameter
-   [classify.otu](/wiki/classify.otu) - added reftaxonomy, group
    and basis options to build a summary file for the results.
-   [trim.seqs](/wiki/trim.seqs) - added keepfirst and removelast
    options as alternative ways of trimming sequences
-   [get.lineage](/wiki/get.lineage) and
    [remove.lineage](/wiki/remove.lineage) - allows users to make
    use of confidence scores
-   [chimera.slayer](/wiki/chimera.slayer) - can now use the
    template file as it's own reference to look for chimeras specific
    to your data
-   [chimera.slayer](/wiki/chimera.slayer) - added a trim parameter
    to only include the portion of the sequence that corresponds to the
    largest parent
-   parse.sff - removed; but implemented in
    [sffinfo](/wiki/sffinfo)
-   [pcoa](/wiki/pcoa) - added R2 metric to output
-   [sub.sample](/wiki/sub.sample) - added persample parameter to
    command
-   [cluster.fragments](/wiki/cluster.fragments) - added percent
    and diffs parameters to command
-   [normalize.shared](/wiki/normalize.shared) - added zscore
    method

<!-- -->

-   new calculators
    -   [canberra](/wiki/canberra)
    -   [gower](/wiki/gower)
    -   [hamming](/wiki/hamming)
    -   [hellinger](/wiki/hellinger)
    -   [manhattan](/wiki/manhattan)
    -   [memchi2](/wiki/memchi2)
    -   [memchord](/wiki/memchord)
    -   [memeuclidean](/wiki/memeuclidean)
    -   [mempearson](/wiki/mempearson)
    -   [odum](/wiki/odum)
    -   [soergel](/wiki/soergel)
    -   [spearman](/wiki/spearman)
    -   [speciesprofile](/wiki/speciesprofile)
    -   [structchi2](/wiki/structchi2)
    -   [structchord](/wiki/structchord)
    -   [structeuclidean](/wiki/structeuclidean)
    -   [structkulczynski](/wiki/structkulczynski)
    -   [structpearson](/wiki/structpearson)

## Bug fixes

-   added headings to the .indicator.summary file
-   fixed weird characters outputted in trim.seqs merging.
-   fixed memory leak in chimera slayer
-   fixed bug with order of printing the distances in the distance file
    output for [unifrac.unweighted](/wiki/unifrac.unweighted) and
    [unifrac.weighted](/wiki/unifrac.weighted)
-   fixed bug in trim.seqs with qtrim=T

## Other stuff

-   added our version of the [RDP reference
    files](/wiki/RDP_reference_files) to the wiki; should give very
    similar output to that generated by the RDP website
